---
title: SIS
---

# Overview

OpoLua provides command line tools for [building](/docs/cli/makesis) and [unpacking](/docs/cli/dumpsis) Psion Software Install System (SIS) files, as well as supporting [installing them](/docs/getting-started/installing-programs) within the Swift and Qt GUI apps.

References:

- [SIS File Format](https://www.thouky.co.uk/software/psifs/sis.html), by Alexander Thoukydideds

  Comprehensive details SIS file binary format.

- [Psion Epoc SIS Installation Files](http://www.ericlindsay.com/epoc/msis5.htm), by Eric Lindsay

  High level overview of SIS files and the PKG format. Useful if you're starting making your own SIS files.

# Platforms

## EPOC16

To make it easier to distribute and install EPOC16 programs[^1], OpoLua uses the previously-unassigned installer version `0x10` (16) to allow us to mark SIS files targeting EPOC16 devices.

These EPOC16-friendly SIS files can be generated by adding a special `target: epoc16` comment to your package file. For example,

```plaintext
; target: epoc16
&EN
#{"PsiMail Internet"},(0x00000001),0,0,0
"NET\SYS$SOCK.IMG"-"!:\NET\SYS$SOCK.IMG"
"NET\SOCKDYL.DYL"-"!:\NET\SOCKDYL.DYL"
"NET\SOCKET.DYL"-"!:\NET\SOCKET.DYL"
"NET\SCRIPT.DYL"-"!:\NET\SCRIPT.DYL"
"NET\STPRPR.DYL"-"!:\NET\STPRPR.DYL"
"NET\STPRTCP.DYL"-"!:\NET\STPRTCP.DYL"
```

This marker is used by OpoLua to pre-configure systems at install time for EPOC16 runtimes, and by apps like [Reconnect](https://reconnect.jbmorley.co.uk) to ensure programs can only be installed on compatible devices. It also allows us to disable EPOC32-specific functionality, and customize stub file paths (used for uninstallation).


[^1]: The EPOC16 platform was never supported by the SIS file format, which was introduced with EPOC32 release 5 (ER5), with support being added retroactively to ER3 and ER4 devices---installing programs on these platforms was achieved dedicated desktop PC installers, or manually copying files.

       Psion's own PsiMail Internet shipped on 3.5" floppy disk with an installer which ran on Windows 3.11 and used `.CTL`, which look a like embryonic `.PKG` files.


